#Reactive Programing
##A high level overview by Dale Corns
###This tutorial will give you a fundamental understanding of the **Reactive** programing paradigm.
####Programing Paradigm
Before we explore the fundamentals of **Reactive Programing**, we need to narrow down our use of the term programing paradigm. For the purposes of this tutorial, a programing paradigm pertains to the tools we use, and how we organize the interaction of these tools to write our program.
Before breaking this down further, it may help to think of a non programing paradigm. Lets take woodworking as an example. Suppose you want to build a bookshelf. You can think of the raw materials for the book shelf as the input to the woodwork and the output of the woodwork as the bookshelf. You should be able to see the resemblance here to a computer program where we have input and a desired output. For making up the paradigm, we are concerned with how we work on the wood. Putting it another way; We have this wood here, but what we want is a bookshelf. So we need a paradigm to transform our wood into a bookshelf. We have a tool box containing the tools we can use for this paradigm. The tool box might include a sander, a saw, a hammer, a screwdriver and some wood clamps. The rest of the paradigm is defined by how the tools interact to create our book shelf. Some tools that we have may not be useful for our paradigm. So, even though we have them, we would not want to use them. For example, if in our interaction of the tools, we wanted to attach pieces of wood with screws, we might use the wood clamps to hold the boards together while we turned the screw with the screwdriver. However we would not want to use a hammer to drive in the screws. Defining the rest of the tools and how we use them to complete our book shelf, would complete our paradigm. We do not need to do this here, however, as this partial example should be enough to clarify what we mean by paradigm. We have a paradigm for attaching boards. I will leave the completion of the paradigm for producing the bookshelf to you. If you do complete the paradigm, you will notice that certain steps are needed to be performed before others. This, order of steps can be understood as part of the organization of the paradigm. In computer programing, our tool box would be the language we we use to write our code. The tools, of course, are all components that make up the language. The language may have all the tools we require with many left over or if the language is too specific, it may not have any of the tools we require. It all depends on the paradigm. In our wood working example, the order in which the interaction of tools occur is important. But as is the case with **reactive programing**, the order in which tools interact is not important. In the next section, we find out why.
####The Reactive Programing Paradigm
In order to discuss the Reactive Programing Paradigm, it is necessary to understand two concepts.


1. propagation of change

2. data flow.
#####Propagation of Change
Let us first deal with the propagation of change. A traffic light changes into three different states; green, yellow, or red. For the change in color to be useful in directing traffic, the the change needs to be propagated to the drivers on the road. This change is propagated by light waves to the eyes of each driver. If this propagation does not occur, the results could be disastrous. The light has no control over the drivers on the road. It only propagates its changes to the driver. When the light propagates the change from green to yellow, some drivers might speed up, others might slow down. That is not the traffic light's problem. All it is supposed to do is propagate the change to the drivers. Taking this analogy a little further, suppose one driver has a big truck in front of him/her that blocks the traffic light from propagating the change. Assuming the truck is legal this is no problem because when the truck slows down, its tail lights will glow brighter or change and that change will be propagated to the driver's eyes, so he can also slow down. So one propagation of change causes a change in the truck that also propagates its change to the driver behind it.
#####Data Flow
Now we can deal with data flow. To do this, we merely refer back to our example for propagation of change. The difference now is that we will focus on the driver of the car, the driver of the truck and the traffic light. If we think of these as data, we can easily see the concept of data flow. Data changes in one chunk of data flow out to cause changes in another chunk of data. When the changes are propagated to a chunk of data, its changes then can cause changes to yet another chunk and so on. When the traffic light changes to red, the truck driver hits his brakes and propagates that change to the driver behind. The driver behind the truck then hits his brakes also, hopefully. Furthermore, these changes could cause changes in all the vehicles behind the driver of the car. So now that we understand paradigm, propagation of change, and data flow, it is a small step to understand the Reactive Programing Paradigm.
To write our code using the Reactive Paradigm, we write in such a way that the data drives and controls the application. Data changes flow throughout the application to other data points whose changes then invoke changes on other data points and so on. If their are no data changes, nothing happens. It is easy to remember the paradigm if you think of the word, **reactive**, itself; data points react to changes in other data points.
#####Applying the Reactive Programing Paradigm
When we think of where we would want to apply the reactive paradigm, data should come to mind. A spread sheet is a good example of the paradigm. When you create a formula in a cell that uses other cell values to come up with its own results, you are implementing a reactive paradigm. When the value of a cell changes, the formulated cell also changes value. Web applications that change the data displayed to a user in real time based on changes to data it depends on is another example. Any kind of data analytics will probably have a whole lot of reactive programing in it as it is all about data analysis.
The Reactive Programing Paradigm can be seen in most web applications. An application does not need to be created using only one paradigm such as this. As with most paradigms, it will probably just be a part of the overall application. Think about the languages that you currently know and explore how you might implement this paradigm using the tools they provide. If the language has events, you should be able to do this with little difficulty. You should now have a fundamental understanding of the Reactive Programing Paradigm. There are many other programing paradigms, and knowing what they are will help you, when determining how to approach a given problem through code.
